Institutions and Economic Development The weakness of formal institutions in developing economies tends to make the commitment problem more prevalent than in developed economies. Informal solutions to the commitment problem. In traditional societies, witnesses were usually present when promises were made between two parties in a trade agreement or other type of contract. Witnesses to a marriage commitment are an important institution in many societies throughout the world; today’s “best man” and “maid (or matron) of honor” are participating in an ancient tradition of witnessing a binding contract. Parties to agreements have often devised ingenious informal mechanisms to create credible commitments. This is the case in all spheres of life: trade, crime, and arms sales, as well as societal commitments such as marriage. For example, army generals have often signaled their commitment to fight on, regardless of the consequences, by burning bridges behind their troops so that the soldiers had nowhere to retreat. These actions have rarely failed to impress the enemy. In the business world, a company might undertake a very large investment that can only be recouped if the product becomes the “next great thing” with booming sales. The company undertakes the investment to show its commitment to challenge other market competitors. On a darker note, in Japan many businesses hire the yakuza , organized crime syndicates, as debt collection agencies. Yakuza agents who threaten a recalcitrant debtor will go so far as to cut off their own finger in front of the debtor to emphasize their commitment to recovering the debt. Because formal contract enforcement is so important in solving commitment problems, developing countries with deficient formal law enforcement must often use informal enforcement agencies. As is the case with hold-up problems, informal institutions are much less effective than formal ones when it comes to solving the commitment problem. Informal enforcement methods were widespread in Russia during the 1990s, when the country started its transition to a market economy, and they often involved criminal organizations or firms that had close links to organized crime. These connections were efficient at using the threat of violence to enforce commitments made by private agents in a variety of contractual situations. Obviously, there was a downside to the use of criminal organizations as enforcement agencies: their methods turned quickly into abuse as contracting parties increasingly turned to the threat of violence as a means to renegotiate agreements. The criminal agencies engaged in racketeering by extorting money or favors from the firms that had hired them in the first place. Competition among criminal agencies led to a deepening spiral of violence and terror. When formal institutions in developing nations cannot enforce both criminal and civil laws, businesses may be forced to use criminal agencies to protect themselves and their business interests. The Russian Mob in a Market Economy 